[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
George Noory with you with our
special guest Tom Campbell.
Now, who is Tom Campbell?
He's a very serious
explorer of the frontiers
of reality, the
mind, consciousness,
and psychic phenomenon.
He's been doing it for
more than 40 years.
Tom, welcome to "Beyond Belief."
>>TOM CAMPBELL:
Thank you, George.
Glad to be here.
>>NOORY: 40 years
you've been doing this?
>>CAMPBELL: 40 years.
>>NOORY: How did
this start for you?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, I was
in graduate school working
on my PhD, and I saw
a notice that said
learn how to meditate.
Special for students, $25.
That's where it started.
I paid my $25 because I wanted
to get by on less sleep.
Graduate students tend to
work long hours, particularly
in experimental physics like
I was in, so that started me.
And within two
months, I found out
I could debug my software
in a meditation state
much faster and much
more effectively than I
could actually looking
at the printout.
>>NOORY: So that
$25 was worth it?
>>CAMPBELL: It was worth it.
And it opened up a whole
new reality for me,
because before, like
most physicists,
if you can't measure it, it's
not real or it's irrelevant.
And at that point, that was
nothing I could measure,
but it was real, because
it was my software that was
being debugged, and it worked.
>>NOORY: Did you end up
getting the PhD in physics?
>>CAMPBELL: I did
not get the PhD.
I did get a PhD education.
I finished the thesis
and did all of that,
but I was needed elsewhere,
and my major professor
wanted me to do another
paper after the first one.
So I declined and went
out and started my life.
>>NOORY: And as you
started your life,
you started talking about
investigating consciousness.
What did you uncover?
>>CAMPBELL: Well,
actually, what happened
is that just after I
graduated and took a job,
I ran into Bob Monroe.
And Bob Monroe had
just built a building
for studying consciousness, but
he didn't have any scientists.
>>NOORY: Expert in
out-of-body experiences.
>>CAMPBELL: Expert.
So I agreed to be one of
his scientists for free
if he would teach
me what he knew.
So I spent the next
five, six, seven
years spending as much
as 20 hours a week
with Bob Monroe in his lab.
And I was building equipment,
and I was doing experiments
with other people, but I also
was an experiment myself.
So Bob taught me how to
go out-of-body on demand,
and how to make that so stable
that I could do experiments
there.
I could do research there.
Change one variable,
do it again.
See if you get the same results.
Change another,
variable do it again.
And so on.
And doing that for
about 35 years,
I thought I understood
how it worked.
So then I wrote a book
about consciousness.
The "My Big Toe" book
has really started out
as a theory of consciousness.
And being a physicist, I should
have picked up on it earlier,
because I knew consciousness
was fundamental,
short of the things
I learned there.
But about two years after
I published these books,
I realized that the same
concepts, the same ideas that
explained consciousness also
explained quantum mechanics,
and that I could actually
derive quantum mechanics
from consciousness theory.
And then I thought a little bit,
and I could derive relativity
as well.
So I started looking around for
all the paradoxes in physics.
Things that weren't answered.
Things that we know are
true because of experiments.
>>NOORY: But they were
all tied together.
>>CAMPBELL: We had no idea.
So I could understand
all of those paradoxes
with this model.
So then I started moving in
into the physics as well.
So it's a model that
describes everything objective
and everything subjective
at the same time.
>>NOORY: When I was
younger, I picked up
Bob Monroe's book,
"Journeys Out of the Body"
and was fascinated by his
work with astral projection.
Are you able to astral
project at will?
>>CAMPBELL: Sure.
Yeah.
I've been able to do
that since probably being
two years with Bob Monroe.
>>NOORY: What a gift.
>>CAMPBELL: Matter of fact, if
you look at Bob's second book,
which was "Far Journeys," you
will find physicist TC is one
of the--
>>NOORY: You're the guy.
>>CAMPBELL: I'm the guy.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Virtual reality.
What is that?
Well, give me a
definition of that.
>>CAMPBELL: OK.
Virtual reality goes by
a lot of different names,
and the one that scientists
use is information-based.
It's an information-based
reality.
That's the same thing as
saying it's a computed reality.
That's the same as saying
it's a simulated reality.
It's a simulation or
a virtual reality.
In other words, all the things
we see, and feel, and hear,
and so on, are information.
And that's not too hard to
understand, because our senses,
we have five senses, and
they all gather information.
And our reality is how we
interpret that sense data.
>>NOORY: We live in a virtual
reality world, they say.
>>CAMPBELL: Yes.
>>NOORY: Is that real,
or is it made up?
>>CAMPBELL: That's real.
That we live in
a virtual reality
is the best metaphor
or the best assumption.
The best model that we
have now of reality.
Quantum mechanics.
And many physicists,
particularly
the younger physicists
that are coming up today,
believe that this is an
information-based reality,
because that's what
quantum physics tells us.
That's what relativity tells us.
>>NOORY: Living in a virtual
reality world is interesting.
But I have always thought
of virtual reality
as you have goggles on, and
you're looking at a video,
and you're in the video.
That's not exactly what
you're talking about, is it?
>>CAMPBELL: No, but it's close.
If we talk about a virtual
reality game, people are--
we play virtual reality like
World of Warcraft or the Sims.
It's more like that.
But when you put on
the goggles, you're
actually a participant
in that virtual reality.
So now we take two of those
and put them together,
and we have our physical bodies.
The physical world is
the virtual reality.
So our body is the avatar.
We are consciousness.
And as consciousness, we're
the player of that avatar.
We make all the choices.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Gregg Braden, on his Gaia
series "Missing Links,"
talked about a simulated world.
>>GREGG BRADEN:
The characteristics
of a simulated world.
A simulation has a
place where it begins,
a definite beginning, and it
has a place where it ends.
And what happens in between
that beginning and that ending
is based on a mathematic
algorithm, a rhythm of cycles
in patterns that repeat
again, and again,
and again on different scales.
In a simulation, there are rules
that govern the simulation.
And the idea is that as the
people in the simulation
become more familiar
with the environment,
as they learn those
rules, life gets better.
They improve with practice.
In a simulation, users have
access to another reality that
is not within the simulation.
In a simulation,
the users always
have access to an
external reality
that they can tap
into for guidance
if they get into trouble or
if they need clarification.
They always have the
ability to communicate
beyond the simulation itself.
That's going to be
really important in just
a few minutes.
And in a simulation,
as I've just mentioned,
the user cannot tell the
simulation from the real world.
All right?
So these are the characteristics
of a modern simulation
as we know it today, as we
use them today typically.
Now, with this in
mind, let's go back
and look at what our most
ancient and cherished
spiritual traditions from a
number of different religions
tell us about the
world that we live in.
Is it possible that
thousands of years
ago, our ancestors were
trying to inform us,
in a language of their time,
something that they understood
that we are only
beginning to awaken
to the possibility of
happening in our lives?
That we are actually
in an artificial world,
a temporary world, that
has a beginning and an end.
That we're learning
something here,
and that we have access to
an external guidance when
we need that access.
>>NOORY: It's kind
of scary, Tom,
thinking that we live in
a virtual reality world.
To me it is.
To you probably not.
>>CAMPBELL: No.
What do you find scary
about it, George?
>>NOORY: Well, it's
just the unknown.
The fact that it may not
be as real as we think.
Or if it is real, it's
not what I expected.
>>CAMPBELL: Well, that brings
us to the definition of what's
real, and I would say
that there is nothing
more real than information.
Information is as
real as it gets.
>>NOORY: I mean, are we really
here together right now,
or is that just a figment
of somebody's imagination?
>>CAMPBELL: No, we are here now.
It's not a figment of
somebody's imagination.
Virtual reality is--
it's not a fake reality.
It's reality.
It's not like there's
the virtual reality then
there's the real reality.
But that thing
that we just heard,
I can put that in a
little different terms
that will maybe
answer your question
and make you feel a
little better about it.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>CAMPBELL: Think of it like
the "World of Warcraft,"
like a virtual reality game.
OK?
And we are the player.
We, consciousness,
are the player.
So when you're the player,
you make all the choices
for your avatar.
But the player, and the
computer that serves the game,
can't be inside the
virtual reality.
They have to be outside
the virtual reality.
And if they're outside
the virtual reality,
then they have to be
non-physical from the viewpoint
of inside the virtual reality.
So see, that's what
Gregg was saying.
That we're consciousness,
therefore we're non-physical.
We're outside of
the virtual reality,
but we're making the
choices of the avatars.
So as consciousness, we
can connect to all the rest
of consciousness.
All the information
that's out there.
That's what Gregg
was talking about.
There's another outside
source that you also
can get help and guidance from,
and find information there.
So as consciousness,
we're not limited
to just this virtual reality.
We're also players in the
larger consciousness system.
>>NOORY: Are we
in the real world,
or are we in the virtual world?
>>CAMPBELL: The virtual world
is our physical universe.
The whole universe,
that's the virtual world.
The real world is the
world of consciousness.
That's fundamental.
The virtual world is
a product, something
generated within consciousness.
It's just information.
>>NOORY: Do we overreact
with virtual reality?
>>CAMPBELL: Well,
a lot of people do.
When they hear that this
is a virtual reality,
or they hear somebody
say that, they
have the idea that oh, it
isn't the real reality.
It's somehow-- it's
a fake reality.
It doesn't matter.
If this is a virtual
reality, then it
doesn't matter what I
do, because it's just
the virtual reality.
>>NOORY: It's not
the real thing.
>>CAMPBELL: It's
not the real thing.
And they have that
reaction to it,
but that is because they are
used to thinking of things
as physical being real.
This physical reality
is the real reality,
and if we're in some
made-up virtual reality,
then what difference
does it make what I do?
Well, it makes
all the difference
in the world what you do.
We're consciousness.
We're the players
of these avatars.
And we have a job.
We are evolving.
Consciousness is
an evolving thing.
And the way consciousness
evolves, in technical terms,
is toward lower entropy.
In non-technical terms,
its toward caring.
Toward empathy.
Toward love.
That's how
consciousness evolves.
And it's our job, as pieces
of consciousness, to evolve.
That's what consciousness does.
So as we evolve,
we have to grow up.
Become caring.
Become less self-centered,
more about other, less
about ourself.
And that's our mission here.
And we do that by
the choices we make.
So all these little choices
we make are critical.
They either help us evolve,
or they help us de-evolve.
>>NOORY: But it's our choice.
>>CAMPBELL: It's our choice.
Yes.
So these choices
are very important.
It's not like, well,
then I can do anything.
Well, you might do anything, but
you may de-evolve rather than
evolve.
And if you continue
to de-evolve,
then you become nothing.
You de-evolve and
become less and less.
You evolve, you become more.
>>NOORY: Tom, you've heard
of the Akashic records.
>>CAMPBELL: Yes.
>>NOORY: What are
they, in your opinion?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, the Akashic
records are a database.
It's information in a database.
And in my theory,
that database has
to exist as part of the
mechanics of creating
the virtual reality.
So when you look at the virtual
reality and how it has to work,
then that database is an
essential and necessary part
of it.
So those Akashic
records maintain
a history of everything
that has happened,
plus everything that
could have happened,
and the probability that
it could have happened.
There's also in
there everything that
is possible to happen in the
future, that might happen,
and the probability that
it actually will happen.
>>NOORY: Bill Foster is an
expert on the Akashic records
and was with me on a previous
"Beyond Belief" show.
>>BILL FOSTER: The
Akashic records
is sort of like God's library
in the higher dimensions,
surrounding the planet where
your soul records are stored.
So everybody, you and
I, and everybody else
on the planet, six billion
people plus right now,
has a book of life.
So it's an energetic,
etheric book of life.
>>NOORY: The good and the bad?
>>FOSTER: Yes.
All of your life experiences
from all of your lifetimes.
Past, present, future.
>>NOORY: So if you've
had 20 different lives,
reincarnated lives,
they're all in that rights?
>>FOSTER: Exactly.
Or 20,000.
>>NOORY: Or 20,000.
So when you die, does
somebody open up that book
and do a review of
what you've done?
>>FOSTER: You do.
You do.
And there are special
teachers there.
They are teachers and
keepers of the records that
are in this library
and school, where God,
sometimes the
archangels, sometimes
family members, whatever is
perfect for the individual.
They're taken, and you look
at your lifetime, basically.
You look at your most
current lifetime,
and you get to see what all
of your missed opportunities
were, your
resentments, you know,
things you need to work on.
And your triumphs.
The things that
you've accomplished.
And because you're in the
higher dimensions at that time,
you're able to see
beyond the moment.
You know, you're able
to look at the past.
And you see how this
lifetime correlates
to your other lifetimes.
>>NOORY: Are we, as the
authors of the Akashic records,
constantly putting
information into it?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, yes.
As we make choices, then
those choices that we make
are recorded.
And the things that happen
in the virtual reality, all
the action that takes place
in the virtual reality that's
based on the choices that the
players make, is then recorded.
So we have that, which
would be in the past,
but we also have a
probable future as well.
There is free will.
The future is not a done deal.
But it's probability.
Some things are more
probable than others.
>>NOORY: How does that affect,
let's say, reincarnation?
In that clip, we talked about
20 lives or 20,000 lives.
How does that affect that?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, I might
add that in my model,
I didn't start out with
things like Akashic records
and reincarnation and
then try to explain them
with a scientific model.
It went the other way around.
I'm a physicist.
I started with physics
and understanding
the nature of reality and
nature of consciousness.
And these things like
the Akashic records
and reincarnation turned out
to be a logical necessity
in the model.
So if the model was going
to work and actually
explain everything
in the objective
and subjective worlds,
then these things
had to be a logical part of it.
So I came at it from
the opposite direction.
The idea of reincarnation is
necessary, because our mission,
as I said, is to become
love, to let go of fear.
Let go of self focus
and self-centeredness.
And that isn't an
easy thing to do.
That's something that means
you have to change yourself.
You have to change who you are.
You have to change the
way you see the world.
And that takes iteration.
Learning something
like that isn't going
to happen in one giant step.
It has to happen in a
series of experiences.
So yes, the
reincarnation then is
something that is part of that
record as well, as he said.
Each of your lives, that's
you trying to evolve.
And all of that data
about how that happened
and the choices you
made are recorded.
And they're there.
>>NOORY: Does the horrible,
wretched person eventually
become an enlightened person?
Even after many, many
reincarnated lives?
>>CAMPBELL: Well,
that's the goal.
That even the horrible,
wretched person
will one day turn
around and start moving
toward love and away from fear.
But that's up to them.
You know, free will choice.
So that is typically what
happens, because the system
will give that person--
the next incarnation
will be such
that it will be easier
for them to succeed.
>>NOORY: Or it should be.
>>CAMPBELL: Yeah.
And so then they'll
have a little success
and then you build
on that excess.
So the system is trying to
help us succeed, because we
are part of the system.
We're consciousness.
The system is consciousness.
So as we evolve, it evolves,
because we're it, it's us.
So the system wants
us to succeed.
So we get the
things that we need
pretty much when we need them.
>>NOORY: What is the difference,
Tom, between consciousness
and subconsciousness?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, there
actually is no subconscious
if you get rid of fear.
It's a little different twist
on the Freudian model of mind,
and that is that fear
is where we create
the subconscious to
deal with the things
that we don't really
want to deal with.
The things we push below
the surface, things
that are uncomfortable for us.
Those things tend to
be in the subconscious.
And if you've developed
the subconscious,
then it becomes that
unknown part of your life
that just kind of
urges you to do things,
and you're not quite sure
where that comes from.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Or eats away at you, too.
>>CAMPBELL: Or eats away at you.
But if you don't have that
fear, and if you are love--
and when you don't have fear,
you are love, by the way.
That's just the way that works.
At that point, you
are a whole person.
You understand all of you.
You don't have part of you
that is hidden from you.
You're aware of all of yourself.
You're aware of your needs.
You're aware of your hunger.
You're aware of your sexuality.
You're aware of what's going on
in your life and who you are.
You are authentic.
And in that stage, you
don't have a subconscious.
You have an awareness
from top to bottom of who
and what you are.
>>NOORY: What is the
Theory of Everything?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, that
is the fundamental model
that I published in 2003.
It's a theory of
consciousness that also turned
into a theory of physics.
But what it does is it explains
everything that is objective.
That would be science,
you know, the quantum
mechanics and relativity.
And it explains everything
that's subjective,
and that's a little different.
And people kind of have
to double-take on that.
Everything's subjective.
That means that your
feelings, your situation,
the level of your happiness,
or your misery, or pain.
All of that has an explanation
why it is you feel that way.
And this model,
then, will explain
why did you feel that way?
So it explains all the
subjective experiences we have.
And when I say
explains it, it means
it hangs it on a
logical structure
so that it makes sense.
We can see where it
comes from, and why
it's like that, and where
we need to go to change it.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
This theory that
you came up with,
was it one of those
aha moments for you?
>>CAMPBELL: It was a very, very
long string of aha moments.
It started with Monroe
at Monroe Laboratories.
I was the physicist there.
I worked with Dennis Mennerich.
He was a EE there,
and we were Bob's lab.
We made the lab, and we were
the Guinea pigs in the lab.
And I--
>>NOORY: Did it all.
>>CAMPBELL: Yeah.
My purpose was to explain
why things happened.
You know, the physicist,
the theoretician.
Dennis was to help
design the equipment
and also work with me.
But I started doing research
there, and experiments there.
And slowly, I
thought I understood
how consciousness worked.
Then I got the aha moment that
understanding consciousness
gave me an understanding
of physics.
So that model just came
together over 35 to 40 years
of research, and it was
based on my experience.
When I was working
in the non-physical,
in the out-of-body state
doing research there,
I came up with a set of facts.
Things that I knew
were true, for me.
You know, this is subjective.
Facts in the world
of consciousness.
I also am a physicist,
so I had a set of facts
in the objective world as
well that I understood,
and I wanted to create a
single, overarching theory that
explained all of those facts.
The facts that I had developed
in the 30 years of out-of-body
and doing research
in consciousness,
and all the facts I
knew as a physicist.
So that's how the model came.
And that's why it's a big toe,
because it's not a little toe
like Einstein worked on.
That would just be
the objective world.
It's the objective and
the subjective world.
>>NOORY: How much of this is a
product of one's imagination?
Or it's the real deal?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, that
is an excellent question.
You see, when you're in
the subjective world,
you get information
from several sources.
One of those is
your imagination.
We're consciousness.
We get to make up
information as well.
The other is the larger
conscious system,
or it could be from some
other consciousness,
because we're all
netted in consciousness.
All conscious beings are netted.
So you never really
know for sure
which one of those three
paths your information
is coming from.
Information defines the reality.
It could be from any of those.
The only way to tell is
with a lot of experience.
And you need to find things
in the consciousness world
that you can then verify
in the physical world.
In other words, things
like remote viewing.
Like healing.
All of the paranormal
things that people do.
Precognitive dreams.
You have to be able
to do enough of this
to convince yourself that
what you're getting is real.
It's not just something
that's in your imagination.
It doesn't really
attach to anything real.
So that's what we spent a decade
at Monroe Laboratories doing.
We spent almost all
of our time doing
things that were evidential.
Things that you could
then look up later and say
does this information I got
correspond with the information
that I know that's here?
>>NOORY: Did you uncover
things that you didn't expect?
>>CAMPBELL: I uncovered lots
of things I didn't expect.
One of them was that when--
as a physicist, and as
particularly a young guy,
I was in my 20s when
all this started.
>>NOORY: Jeez, you were a baby.
>>CAMPBELL: I was a baby, yeah.
I first went out to Monroe
Laboratory working with him
and I was like 28?
27, 28 years old.
>>NOORY: Good for you, though.
>>CAMPBELL: So I had
this idea that religion
was mostly nonsense.
That it was mostly made
out of fearful people who
were looking for
answers to big questions
that didn't have answers.
And I discounted it.
I was arrogant.
You know, most young
physicists in their 20s
are pretty arrogant.
So I had this arrogant attitude.
So I thought that
religion was mostly
nonsense and a lot of belief.
And then one of my big
things that I didn't expect
was that most of what I
learned about consciousness
and the nature of
reality was stuff
that people had known
for the last 5,000 years.
And, you know, the Buddha said
that reality was an illusion.
Well, he didn't use the
words virtual reality,
but it fits perfectly.
And sages, and people who
have explored inner space
come to all the same
conclusions that I
came to as a physicist doing
research in the nonphysical.
It all boiled down to
pretty much the same thing.
And then I realized that
religion, for the most part,
was based on fundamental truths.
That is the way it is.
That's the way the world works.
But there's also lots
of dogma, and creeds,
and my god's better than
your god sort of thing.
There is a lot of
nonsense involved in it,
but the fundamentals,
the basic ideas
that are common
to most religions,
are fundamental truth.
That is the way it is.
>>NOORY: Tom, what exactly
is quantum mechanics?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, quantum
mechanics was actually
created because
of one experiment,
and that was the
double-slit experiment.
And quantum mechanics
was invented
to explain the results
of this experiment.
And in this
experiment, the results
were such that they
defied materialism.
They defied Newtonian mechanics.
So Einstein came
to the conclusion,
actually got a Nobel Prize for
it, that light was a particle.
And we had known, scientists
had known for almost 100 years,
that light was a wave.
So now there was
this discrepancy,
because particles and waves
don't act the same way.
So the scientists at that time,
now this is like 1915 to 1925,
that decade is when
most of this took place,
they found a way to
take light particles,
photons, and send
them at a barrier that
had two slits cut in it.
Because they knew that if
they shined a coherent light
on those two slits,
they would get what's
called a diffraction pattern.
There'd be places where
there was no light,
and other places
where there was light,
because light would go
through both the slits,
interfere with itself, and
make this diffraction pattern.
Well, when they put
particles through there,
particles are just supposed
to go through a slit
and then hit the
screen behind the slit,
because that's
what particles do.
>>NOORY: But not this time.
>>CAMPBELL: But not this time.
This time, when they just
sent the particles through one
at a time, those particles
rearranged themselves
in the same diffraction pattern
that a light wave would make.
And then, to find out really
what was going on at those two
slits, they put detectors
there so they could tell when
a photon went through a slit.
And when they did
that, the photons just
piled up behind the slits
like a good particle
is supposed to do.
So now they had this problem of
when they looked at the data,
at the slit, they got
particle pattern, if you will.
Piles of particles.
And when they didn't, they got
a wave, which was the same as--
which produced a
diffraction pattern.
So there was no way to
explain that, because you
see these particles, Newton
told us, were supposed
to travel in a straight
line unless acted upon
by an external force.
It's like Newton's second law.
That's so long ago, I'm
not sure I got that right,
but it's one of Newton's.
>>NOORY: You were there
with Newton, weren't you?
>>CAMPBELL: Almost.
It was one of Newton's laws.
And anyhow, that's not
what was happening.
There were no external
forces on these particles,
but yet they weren't
traveling in a straight line.
They were rearranging themselves
in this very particular wave
pattern.
So quantum mechanics was
born to answer that question.
How can we understand this?
And what they decided was that
there really were no particles.
There's only probable particles.
A particle might be
somewhere and might not.
So particles only
existed as probability.
>>NOORY: So they weren't sure.
>>CAMPBELL: Yeah.
Well, they're saying that
there are no particles.
There's just probability.
And if we look at the
probability of where
these particles go,
then we can do the math,
and look at the
probability function,
and we get this
diffraction pattern.
So that was where quantum
mechanics was born.
And then of course in
the next 100 years,
it was about 100
years ago, they got
more and more sophisticated,
and quantum mechanics
grew and developed,
and now it's one
of our most productive, most
successful theories ever,
because it's almost
always right.
It makes the right predictions.
>>NOORY: Tom, you
produced a video
on how you believe we
can change the world.
>>CAMPBELL: If you'd
like to change the world,
if you're tired of all of the
greed and abuse, people using
people, corporations using their
customers, and their suppliers,
and everybody else to
accumulate more and more wealth.
If you really don't like
the self-centeredness
and the nastiness that we
find here instead of the love,
and peace, and caring that
we'd like to find here,
well, the way you go
about changing the world
is by changing yourself.
All the negative
things that you see
going on in the world that are
upsetting to you are symptoms.
They're symptoms of a low
quality of consciousness.
They're symptoms of a high
entropy consciousness.
Once we understand that
this is a virtual reality,
once these experiments
are done and help
verify that this is a virtual
reality, once we as a people,
or as a race,
understand our purpose
as consciousness is to grow
up and evolve our quality,
then people will
begin to change.
And as people change,
these symptoms
of low quality of consciousness
will change all by themselves.
You see, it's the
quality of consciousness
that's the problem.
Not the dictator, not
the president and CEO
of the corporation that's
abusing people, not
the politicians.
Those are symptoms
of the problem.
The problem is low
quality of consciousness.
Doing these experiments, showing
that this is a virtual reality,
understanding what that
means in terms of who we are,
and what's important and what's
not in terms of growing up
and decreasing our entropy.
Increasing the quality
of our consciousness.
Becoming love.
Caring about other people.
This is what will
change the world.
If we want to live in a
kinder, gentler world,
we have to change
ourselves first.
>>NOORY: I love that picture
of those politicians punching
each other out.
Must've been an
emotional meeting.
Can we change ourselves,
or is this something
that is built within us?
>>CAMPBELL: Oh, of course
we can change ourselves.
We can grow up.
We can become more.
And how we do that is by
letting go of our fear.
Fear is the problem.
As we let go of fear--
>>NOORY: The unknown
as part of the fear.
>>CAMPBELL: Yeah, The
unknown is part of fear.
People fear the unknown.
That's part of their fear
of death, and part of that's
a fear of the unknown.
But they fear all sorts
of personal things, too.
They fear that they
are inadequate,
that they're not good enough,
that they are unlovable,
that they need to pretend
to be somebody else in order
to be liked.
So they live in an image
rather than being authentic.
So we have lots
of, lots of fears,
and those fears
inform our choices.
And we need to, basically,
take ourselves back,
if you will, from those fears.
And as we get rid of the fear,
life becomes more about others
and less about us.
Fear is very self-referential.
>>NOORY: Right.
Why does it seem that
when you're born,
and we develop these
different traits,
that nobody teaches
us this, what
you're talking about today?
Is this something that we
just inherit and pick up?
Is it part of our
genetic makeup?
Or do we really learn it
from outside exposure?
>>CAMPBELL: Well, the reason
that it's so hard to teach
is you can't teach
somebody how to grow up.
You can't teach
somebody how to be.
>>NOORY: Or to love.
>>CAMPBELL: Yeah, or to love.
Those things are hard to teach.
It's something that you are.
It's a matter of being.
So you have to change yourself.
Nobody else can come
in and change you.
You can't change anyone else.
You make choices, and
you do end up growing up,
one way or another, more or
less based on those choices
and the quality
of those choices.
So if those choices are
about caring, and love,
and it's about other,
not about self,
then you grow up
very positively.
If the choices are poor
choices, you don't grow up.
You stay full of fear.
Unhappy, miserable.
>>NOORY: What have you
concluded, Tom, about humanity?
What direction are we headed?
>>CAMPBELL: I think that
there's a good chance
that in the next two, or
three, or four decades,
humanity will take
a giant step forward
in this evolutionary game.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>CAMPBELL: Yes.
And the reason for that
is, for the first time
in the history of humanity, all
the pieces are in place for us
to take a big step forward.
Now, we've been
evolving all along,
and we've had people
like the Buddha
who understood, you know,
what life was about.
And not just the Buddha,
but religions in general.
And we've had that,
but it's always
been limited in
sort of the margins.
It's there, but it's margins.
Well, now, we have
the infrastructure
called the internet
that lets us communicate
worldwide very, very quickly.
So now, these little kind
of bubbles of enlightenment
that have always been
there can coalesce.
Also, we have an ability
to create empathy
with people other than just
our family and our neighbors.
You know, it used to be that
somebody said, oh, 1,000 people
were killed in a
tsunami or a hurricane
on the other side of the world.
People would go, oh,
yeah, gee, too bad.
But they wouldn't
connect to that.
Now, we get to see them
up close and personal.
>>NOORY: It's like we're there.
>>CAMPBELL: Like we're there.
That is enlarging our
viewpoint, enlarging our world.
So as we grow, the
world tends to shrink.
We see the humanity in others.
We see eyeball to eyeball the
things that people are doing.
We have a better sense
of the kind of reality
we're living in.
And most people don't find
that to be a very good thing.
They see that this
world is full of fear.
It's full of nastiness.
It's full of greed.
It's full of people
out for themselves.
You know, how can I use
you, and what can I take?
And I think most of us
feel like that's not good.
It's not optimal.
It's not really
where we need to be.
But it won't get
into the mainstream
until the mainstream, which
now it's the scientists--
I call the scientists the high
priests of Western culture.
The high priest's job was to
tell the people what was true
and what to believe.
And if the high priests of
Western culture say yea verily,
this is a virtual
reality, then that
will start a ball rolling
that logically, will start out
as this reality is
information-based to love
is the answer.
There is a logical connection
from one of those to the other.
Take us probably more
time than we have here
to go through that, but if that
happens, and the high priests
put us into the mainstream with
that concept of what we're here
to do is grow up,
become love, then
people who are fed up
with greed and avarice
will begin to see a better way.
This idea of a virtual
reality, this idea
that I have in "My Big
Toe," it's very inclusive.
Everybody can be a part of it.
It's not something
you have to believe.
Matter of fact, I say
belief is a problem.
Ego and belief are problems.
Always be skeptical.
But it's something
that opposites
can find their self in.
In other words, if
you're an atheist,
you can look at the "My
Big Toe" and you can say,
ah, knew it all along.
There's no God, but there's
this larger consciousness system
that does all the things
that people in religion
say that God does.
And if you are a theist, you can
say, ah, I knew it all along.
This larger
consciousness system.
That's God.
So people from all sides
can find a logical structure
that they can hang
their own experience on.
And when that
happens, I think we'll
have some bigger steps made
as far as our growing up goes.
>>NOORY: If we don't, if we
don't accept it, if we don't
learn it, what happens to us?
>>CAMPBELL: We get to try again.
We get to keep trying
and keep working on it
until we do get it.
>>NOORY: So we get that
second or third chance?
>>CAMPBELL: Yes.
And we will get as many
chances as we need,
because what we're talking
about is evolution.
It's the evolution
of consciousness
toward lower entropy states,
toward becoming love.
And evolution may be very slow,
but evolution is relentless.
Evolution just keeps
the pressure up, just
keeps pushing until it succeeds.
That's the nature of evolution.
We evolve into those states
that are more profitable.
And being kind, and
considerate, and caring
makes a more profitable
social system.
>>NOORY: Tom, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>CAMPBELL: Thank you.
>>NOORY: He was a
20-something-year-old person
working with Robert Monroe
at the Monroe Institute
and learned about consciousness,
out-of-body experiences,
and has learned one major thing.
That humanity can
change for the better.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."